add sql optimizations (#401)
risingwavelabs/risingwave-docs: performance/streaming-optimization.mdx

---

> title: "Streaming Optimizations"

Reviewer: We mostly follow Google Developer Documentation Style Guide and use sentence-style headings. 
https://www.notion.so/risingwave-labs/Style-Guide-RisingWave-Labs-4ced028eb5e9476ea692795a042e441d?pvs=4

Author: https://github.com/risingwavelabs/risingwave-docs/pull/401/commits/580bd3d437a71fa6eb264bb8d03a6ef35508b752

> description: "RisingWave provides a variety of optimizations to improve the performance of streaming queries."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: "Learn about how to improve the performance of streaming queries by rewriting them using specific patterns."
```

sidebarTitle: Overview
---

> This section outlines best practices for Streaming Optimizations.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This section outlines best practices for Streaming Optimizations.
Rewrite your SQL into specific patterns can have better performance.
```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This section covers best practices for optimizing streaming queries.
You can often achieve better performance by rewriting your SQL to follow certain recommended patterns.
```

## SQL Optimizations

### UNION vs UNION ALL

UNION removes duplicates, while UNION ALL does not.
If you know that your data does not contain duplicates, use UNION ALL to avoid the overhead of duplicate removal.
Alternatively, if the duplicate set is small, you can also filter out duplicates when querying the result set.

> ### OverWindow vs GroupTopN

Reviewer 2: refine the page https://docs.risingwave.com/processing/sql/top-n-by-group , and link here instead?

Author: https://github.com/risingwavelabs/risingwave-docs/pull/401/commits/41f36204bcf667392b8410c2c55606bdddc32484

 StreamMaterialize { columns: [r, t3._row_id(hidden), t3.v1(hidden)], stream_key: [t3._row_id, t3.v1], pk_columns: [t3._row_id, t3.v1], pk_conflict: NoCheck }
 └─StreamProject { exprs: [row_number, t3._row_id, t3.v1] }
   └─StreamOverWindow { window_functions: [row_number() OVER(PARTITION BY t3.v1 ORDER BY t3.v2 ASC ROWS BETWEEN UNBOUNDED PRECEDING AND CURRENT ROW)] }
     └─StreamExchange { dist: HashShard(t3.v1) }
       └─StreamTableScan { table: t3, columns: [v1, v2, _row_id] }
(5 rows)
```

The operator responsible for sorting the data is `StreamOverWindow`. This is a streaming operator that maintains the state of the window and computes the row number for each row in the partition.
This can be quite expensive, especially if the partition is large.
If you only need the top N rows from each partition, you can use the `StreamGroupTopN` operator instead.
This can be done by simply adding a `WHERE` clause to the query, and applying it to the row column (`r` in the above example).

You can view the following query as an example, which maintains top 10 rows for each partition:
```sql

> dev=> explain create materialized view m1 as select r from (select *, row_number() over (PARTITION BY v1 order by v2) r from t3) where r < 10;

Reviewer 3: Shall we mention the `EXCEPT` syntax here?

Author: I didn't get it

Author: resolve it first to merge.

                                                                          QUERY PLAN
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 StreamMaterialize { columns: [r, t3.v1(hidden), t3._row_id(hidden)], stream_key: [t3.v1, t3._row_id], pk_columns: [t3.v1, t3._row_id], pk_conflict: NoCheck }
 └─StreamProject { exprs: [row_number, t3.v1, t3._row_id] }
   └─StreamOverWindow { window_functions: [row_number() OVER(PARTITION BY t3.v1 ORDER BY t3.v2 ASC ROWS BETWEEN UNBOUNDED PRECEDING AND CURRENT ROW)] }
     └─StreamGroupTopN { order: [t3.v2 ASC], limit: 9, offset: 0, group_key: [t3.v1] }
       └─StreamExchange { dist: HashShard(t3.v1) }
         └─StreamTableScan { table: t3, columns: [v1, v2, _row_id] }
(6 rows)
```

Given that the state size to maintain is a lot smaller, the `StreamGroupTopN` operator is much more efficient than the `StreamOverWindow` operator.

> ### JOIN Optimizations

Reviewer 2: ditto, should we refine https://docs.risingwave.com/processing/sql/joins instead?

We'd better avoid too many pages have duplicate content

Author: https://github.com/risingwavelabs/risingwave-docs/pull/401/commits/a16406326dbd22863817fe9d3756dc9a6a7aba85
